Schema-updates (#75)
ga4gh/seqcol-spec: docs/specification.md

This would provide improved reproducibility.

Some other examples of common use cases where the use of seqcol is beneficial include:

- As a user I wish to know what sequences are inside a specific collection, so that I can further access those sequences
- As a user, I want to compare the two sequence collections used by two separate analyses so I can understand how comparable and compatible their resulting data are.
- As a user I am interested in a genome sequence collection but want to extract those sequences which compose the chromosomes/karyotype of a genome
- As a submission system, I want to know what exactly a sequence collection contained so I can validate a data file submission.
- As a submission system, I want to know what exactly a sequence collection contains so I can validate a data file submission.
- As a software developer, I want to embed a sequence collection digest in my tool's output so that downstream tools can identify the exact sequence collection that was used

> - As a data processor, my input data didn't include information about the reference genome used, and I want to generate it and attach it so that further processing can benefit from the sequence collection features.

Reviewer: Ah, the wrong line was deleted. 57 is a duplicate of line 55 and was probably the line that was supposed to be removed

> - As a genome browser, I have one sequence collection that the coordinate system displayed, and I want to know if a digest representing the coordinate system of a given BED file is compatible with the genome browser.

Reviewer: @nsheff I believe you forgot this. I previously suggested changing into "genome browser user", but reverted that as we in any case are impersonating computer systems with the "As a submission system" use case above.

Some other examples of common use cases where the use of seqcol is beneficial include:

- As a user I wish to know what sequences are inside a specific collection, so that I can further access those sequences
- As a user, I want to compare the two sequence collections used by two separate analyses so I can understand how comparable and compatible their resulting data are.
- As a user I am interested in a genome sequence collection but want to extract those sequences which compose the chromosomes/karyotype of a genome
- As a submission system, I want to know what exactly a sequence collection contains so I can validate a data file submission.
- As a software developer, I want to embed a sequence collection digest in my tool's output so that downstream tools can identify the exact sequence collection that was used
- As a submission system, I want to know what exactly a sequence collection contains so I can validate a data file submission.
- I have a chromosome sizes file (a set of lengths and names), and I want to ask whether a given sequence collection is length-compatible with and/or name-compatible with this chromosome sizes file.

> - As a genome browser, I have a sequence collection defining a coordinate system, and I want to know if a given BED file is compatible.

Author: I rephrased it.

  - sequences
```

> This example schema is the minimal standard schema. We RECOMMEND that all implementations use this as a base schema, adding additional attributes as needed, but *without changing the inherent attributes list*, because this will keep the identifiers compatible across implementations.

Reviewer: Do we want to add "accessions" into the minimal schema, or is that rather meant as an example?

Reviewer: One could for instance argue that one would want a different array for each type of accession number. I cannot recall having this discussion (but I might also have been absent)?

Reviewer: Also, since `sorted_name_length_pairs` and `sorted_sequences` are described in the specification itself, shouldn't we provide a template for how these attributes should be added to the schema, if used?

> Sequence collection objects that follow this basic minimal structure are said to be the *canonical seqcol object representation*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sequence collection objects that follow this basic minimal structure are said to have the *canonical seqcol object representation*.
```

> Adding custom attributes to this schema will not break interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding custom non-inherent attributes to this schema will not break interoperability.
```

> Nevertheless, extending this schema is only RECOMMENDED; implementations are still compliant if using custom schemas with custom inherent attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, custom schemas are only RECOMMENDED to extend the minimal standard schema; implementations are still compliant if using custom schemas with custom inherent attributes, but this comes with the cost of reduced interoperability.
```

This object would validate against the JSON Schema above.
The object is a series of arrays with matching length (`3`), with the corresponding entries collated such that the first element of each array corresponds to the first element of each other array.
For the rationale why this structure was chosen instead of an array of annotated sequences, see [*Footnote F1*](#f1-why-use-an-array-oriented-structure-instead-of-a-sequence-oriented-structure).

> The implementation `MUST` define its structure in a JSON Schema, such as the example schema defined in step 1.

Reviewer: Lines 188-190 now seems like a duplication of content in the new main section 1, so I think these should either be removed or merged into section 1 if one wants to retain the more "rule-focused" way this is written here. If a duplication of content is wanted, then it should refer to "section 1" and not "step 1".

Implementations `MAY` choose to extend this schema by adding additional attributes.
Implmentations `MAY` also use a schema, but we `RECOMMEND` the schema extend the base schema defined above.

> This schema extends vanilla JSON Schema in two ways; first, it provides the `collated` qualifier.

Reviewer: Lines 191-195 relates to the schema (but not, I believe, duplicated content) and should be moved/merged with section 1

##### Level 0 (AKA "top level")

Just a plain digest. This corresponds to **0 database lookups**. Example:
```
a6748aa0f6a1e165f871dbed5e54ba62
```

##### Level 1

What you'd get when you look up the digest with **1 database lookup** and no recursion. Previously called "layer 0" or "reclimit 0" because there's no recursion. Also sometimes called the "array digests" because each entity represents an array.

Example:
```
{
  "lengths": "4925cdbd780a71e332d13145141863c1",
  "names": "ce04be1226e56f48da55b6c130d45b94",
  "sequences": "3b379221b4d6ea26da26cec571e5911c"
}
```

##### Level 2

What you'd get with **2 database lookups** (equivalently, 1 recursive call). This is the most common representation, more commonly used than either the "level 1" or the "level 3" representations.

```
{
  "lengths": [
    "1216",
    "970",
    "1788"
  ],
  "names": [
    "A",
    "B",
    "C"
  ],
  "sequences": [
    "76f9f3315fa4b831e93c36cd88196480",
    "d5171e863a3d8f832f0559235987b1e5",
    "b9b1baaa7abf206f6b70cf31654172db"
  ]
}
```

> ##### Level 3

Author: This ADR is where it mentions level 3: https://github.com/ga4gh/seqcol-spec/blob/master/docs/decision_record.md#2022-10-05---terminology-decisions

I copied this right out of the ADR.

Are you suggesting I remove level 3 from the formal spec?

```

#### Terminology

Because the encoding algorithm is recursive, this leads to a few different ways to represent a sequence collection. We refer to these representations in "levels". The level number represents the number of "lookups" you'd have to do from the "top level" digest. So, we have:

##### Level 0 (AKA "top level")

Just a plain digest. This corresponds to **0 database lookups**. Example:
```
a6748aa0f6a1e165f871dbed5e54ba62
```

##### Level 1

> What you'd get when you look up the digest with **1 database lookup** (no recursion). We sometimes refer to this as the "array digests" or "attribute digests", because it is made up a digest for each attribute in the sequence collection. Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What you'd get when you look up the digest with **1 database lookup**. We sometimes refer to this as the "array digests" or "attribute digests", because it is made up a digest for each attribute in the sequence collection. Example:
```

```
{
  "lengths": "4925cdbd780a71e332d13145141863c1",
  "names": "ce04be1226e56f48da55b6c130d45b94",
  "sequences": "3b379221b4d6ea26da26cec571e5911c"
}
```

##### Level 2

> What you'd get with **2 database lookups** (1 recursive call). This is the most common representation, and hence, it the level of the *canonical seqcol representation*. Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What you'd get with **2 database lookups**. This is the most common representation, and hence, it is the level of the *canonical seqcol representation*. Example:
```

Reviewer: I see no point in complicating the matter by adding the number of recursive calls

Reviewer: Here, the term "canonical seqcol representation" is used instead of the "canonical seqcol object representation". See my main review comments on this.

  - sequences
```

#### 3.2 Collection

- *Endpoint*: `GET /collection/:digest?level=:level` (`REQUIRED`)
- *Description*: The retrieval function specifies an API endpoint that retrieves original sequences from a database keyed by the unique digest. Here `:digest` is the seqcol digest computed above.  The level corresponds to the "expansion level" of the returned sequence collection returned. The default is `?level=2`, which returns the canonical structure.
- *Return value*: The sequence collection identified by the `:digest` variable. The structure of the data `MUST` be modulated by the `:level` query parameter.  Specifying `?level=2` returns the canonical structure, and `?level=1` returns the collection with digested attributes.

Non-inherent attributes `MUST` be stored and returned by the collection endpoint alongside inherent attributes.

#### 3.3 Comparison

> 

Author: Indeed, that's an error. I fixed it.

4. Sort the digests lexicographically.
5. Add as a non-inherent, non-collated attribute to the sequence collection object.

#### 4.2 The `sorted_sequences` attribute (`OPTIONAL`)

The `sorted_sequences` attribute is a *non-inherent* attribute of a sequence collection, with a formal definition.
Providing this attribute is `OPTIONAL`.
When digested, this attribute provides a digest representing an order-invariant set of unnamed sequences.
It provides a way to compare two sequence collections to see if their sequence content is identical, but just in a different order.

> Such a comparison can, of course, be made by the comparison function, so why might you want to include this attribute as well?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such a comparison can be made by the comparison function, so why might you want to include this attribute as well?
```

> Simply that for some large-scale use cases, comparing the sequence content without considering order is something that needs to be done repeatedly and for a huge number of collections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some large-scale use cases, comparing the sequence content without considering order is something that needs to be done repeatedly and for a huge number of collections.
```

Since this concept can be a bit abstract for those not familiar, we'll try here to explain the rationale and benefit of this.
First, consider that in a sequence comparison, for some use cases, we may be primarily concerned only with the *length* of the sequence, and not the actual sequence of characters.
For example, BED files provide start and end coordinates of genomic regions of interest, which are defined on a particular sequence.
On the surface, it seems that two genomic regions are only comparable if they are defined on the same sequence.

> However, this not *strictly* true; in fact, really, as long as the underlying sequences are homologous, and the position in one sequence references an equivalent position in the other, then it makes sense to compare the coordinates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this not *strictly* true; in fact, as long as the underlying sequences are homologous and the position in one sequence references an equivalent position in the other, then it makes sense to compare the coordinates.
```

See: [ADR from 2023-07-12 on sorted name-length pairs](decision_record.md#2023-07-12-implementations-should-provide-sorted_name_length_pairs-and-comparison-endpoint)

### F8. Adding new schema attributes

> A strength of this standard is that the schema definition can be modified for particular use cases, for example, by adding new attributes into a sequence collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A strength of the seqcol standard is that the schema definition can be modified for particular use cases, for example, by adding new attributes into a sequence collection.
```

> This will allow different communities to use the standard without necessarily needing to subscribe to identical schemas, allowing the standard to be more general useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will allow different communities to use the standard without necessarily needing to subscribe to identical schemas, allowing the standard to be more generally useful.
```

However, if communities define too many custom attributes, this leads to the possibility of fragmentation.

> For example, two implementations may start using the same attribute name to refer to different things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, two implementations may start using the same attribute name to refer to different concepts.
```

> While this will not cause major problems, as the attributes will be formally defined in the respective schemas provided by each implementation, it would come at the cost of some interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the attributes would still be formally defined in the respective schemas provided by each implementation, calling different concepts by the same name would come at the cost of interoperability.
```

Therefore, the standard will also include in the schema a list of formally defined attributes, to encourage interoperability of these attributes.
The goal is not to include all possible attributes in the schema, but just those likely to be used repeatedly, to encourage interoperable use of those attribute names.
An implementation may propose a new attribute to be added to this extended schema by raising an issue on the GitHub repository.
The proposed attributes and definition can then be approved through discussion during the refget working group calls and ultimately added to the approved extended seqcol schema.

> These issues should have the label 'schema-term'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These GitHub issues should be created with the label 'schema-term'.
```
